Next, we want to actually style things
up a little bit, we don't have,
this header, it's kinda junky,
just everything smashed on top of itself.
If we want that to look
like an actual header bar,
we want the content to not be smashed
against the side of the page.
So let's style our layout.
And for the layout styles,
I want to be able to write the styles
without fear of collision later on.
So one of the hot topics in CSS, and
one of the big frustrations that a lot
of people run into when doing styling,
is, how do you avoid really
complex naming structures.
Or just a lot of rules in the way that
you write CSS without running into
this problem where the cascade
in CSS becomes a big foot gun?
We don't want it to be a trap, right?
We want it to be something
where when you write styles,
you can take advantage of the CSS cascade,
you can just write CSS.
And it's very powerful,
it gives you a lot of opportunities,
but it doesn't become cumbersome, right?
CSS should be fun, and
I think that by using CSS with
a few guardrails, it can be fun.
It doesn't need to be this
thing that is terrifying and
stressful and hard to scale and
all this stuff, right?
And so that's why in this workshop,
we're actually just going to write CSS.
There are a million options out there,
you could introduce CSS and JS,
one of the tools like Emotion.
You could introduce Tailwind, or Chakra.
Those are all good solutions, and if
that's what your team wants to do, 100%,
do it,
they're great ways to handle styles.
I like a less is more kind of approach, so
I'm gonna be using CSS modules,
which is not exactly a CSS spec,
but it allows us to not add any additional
libraries for writing our styles.
I also really like CSS modules,
because they're more or
less built into all the frameworks now, so
you can use CSS modules with Gatsby,
with Next, with Knocks.
There's a bunch of different frameworks
out there now that will just give you out
of the box support for CSS modules,
which means you get to write CSS.
You don't have to learn Less or Sass or
Stylus or Tailwind, or Chakra or
emotion or any of the CSS and JS stuff.
You can just write the CSS you already
know, import it as a module, and
it just works, so let's do that.
I'll show you how it works.
So we created this one as global.css.
For a scoped CSS or a CSS module,
we just have to do module dot CSS.
So by adding this layout.module.css,
I have now indicated to Gatsby that I want
to use this as a CSS module, so inside
of it, I can just start writing CSS.
So I wanna have some styles for
the header.
So I'm gonna use that black color for
the background and then I want the regular
color, needs to be high contrast for
accessibility, so we'll make it white.
I want to use display flex so that I
can get the header link, the home link
to be on one side and the nav to be on
the other side, I want them to be spread.
So I'm gonna use display: flex; and
then justify-content: space-between.
Which the way that I remember this is
every time I look at the CSS rule,
I think about that Dave Matthews' song,
The Space Between, and
it gets stuck in my head,
now it gets to get stuck in your head too.
So then we're gonna add a little bit of
padding around the header, about 1 rem.
If you're not familiar with REMs,
REMs are the the original font size,
so when we look at the global.css and
I set font size of 18 here,
now I've basically said 1 rem is 18 pix.
And the reason I use REMs is that I
can now make my whole layout relative
to that base font size.
It's a nice little pattern,
makes my life easier and
you don't have to stress about it now.
So inside of this, I'm gonna use
just regular old CSS selectors.
I wanna get any link
inside of the header and
I want to make it whatever
the color of the header is.
I also want to make it inline-block so
that we can apply some padding around it.
And so we're gonna set
the padding to be 0.5 rem and
then I wanna take off the underline.
But because I just took off the underline,
that would cause an accessibility issue,
if I didn't add something back.
So we're gonna go to the focus and
hover state, and
we're going to say that when it's hovered,
we're gonna set
the background to be white, and
the color to be black, all right.
And then the last thing that I wanna do
here is I just wanna set a little bit of
space around the content.
So we're gonna create a class called
content, this will go on our main tag.
And I want to give it a margin
of 3 rem on the top and
bottom, and auto on the left and
right, that'll center it.
And then I wanna put a max width of,
we're gonna use a little trick that
I like of using the character.
So what this means is when you look at
the legibility of text, one of the things
that we found is that a line length has
a bigger impact than the actual width.
So, depending on the number
of characters per line,
you actually wanna adjust
the width the screen.
So 54 characters wide gives you a pretty
legible reading for tracking of text.
You can adjust this, there's really good
research you can read on the way that
works but
I like this in CSS is kind of setting.
Whatever we do with the font sizes,
let's make sure that our line length is
good and adjust the width accordingly,
so that, I think that's good enough,
let's stop there.
So these are the styles that will
give us a header and content but
notice I use some pretty risky class
names here, like .header, .content.
As this codebase scales,
there's a near 100% chance
that somebody else would
create a .content class.
Unless we implemented some kind of naming
scheme like BEM or something where you
have to do the component name underscore
underscore, content underscore, whatever.
There's these tricky things you have
to do to avoid naming collisions.
But because we're using CSS modules,
we don't have to care about that,
we can not worry about that and instead
just write class names that we like.
Because the way that we're actually gonna
use this is we are going to import it
as if it was a JavaScript package.
So down here in our our layout,
I'm gonna import header and
content from the module,
so from styles and
layout.module.css like they were
just JavaScript classes or objects.
And then I can use these as class names.
So on my header,
I'm gonna set a class name of header.
And on my main, I'm gonna set
a class name of content, all right?
And once I have saved this, look at that,
we've got ourselves a site,
but here's what's really cool about these,
let me make this a little bit bigger so
we can see what's going on here.
When I select this header, note that
it's not using header as the class,
it automatically generated
all of that scoping for me.
So that these styles are actually going
to correctly respect inheritance.
Now there's some things that I can
do to make this hard on myself.
I targeted every a inside of
a header without any restrictions.
So if we had a nav component and
had a nav.module.css that had its own
link styles, I can still get collisions,
so you can still make this hard.
There are things that
you need to think about,
I chose not to worry about that
because this site is not gonna
grow beyond the couple of
pages we're making here.
But it's a consideration, if you wanna
be absolutely sure, instead of using
header a, we probably would have wanted
to do something like header link, right?
It doesn't matter,
you can do it whichever way you want.
Using named classes for everything
is probably the the safest solution.
But if you are sure that your
header is going to always have
links that should always look the same,
then you can make that choice.